Add "Designing A Workflow Engine from First Principles" talk notes (#342)
temporalio/documentation: blog/2021-04-05-workflow-engine-principles.md

Every practical workflow engine uses queues to dispatch tasks to workers (working processes that host those tasks).

## Timer Queue (7:10)

Time is important because: 

- every task invocation should have a timeout
- the workflow itself can time out
- you need to be able to execute operations like sleeping for 30 days

So you also need an external timer service or timer queue that durably stores and dispatches these timers.

![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 014](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113586984-c7ea9b00-9660-11eb-87ab-359b0b0b5d48.png)

## Consistency and the importance of Transactions (7:35)

We need to store the state of the workflow so that every time we start a workflow, we:

- create state in the database
- create a timer
- pull tasks from the task queue for the WorkflowDefinition to pick up
- when it gives a list of commands we need to update and create tasks and update the state

**These updates across multiple data sources must be transactional**.

![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 016](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113587041-d8027a80-9660-11eb-9d30-d21aaa50f685.png)

> If you run atop a workflow engine that doesn't have transactions across all these components, you will run into all sorts of race conditions:
> 
> - if you update state, and put tasks in task queue, and the state update goes through, but the task queue update fails, your system ends up in a state where it thinks there is a task outstanding but the task is not.
> - if you put tasks in a task queue first and then update state, then If your update is slow, the task can be delivered and processed by the time that goes through so it will be inconsistent and need to deal with edge cases
> 
> If all these updates are transactional, then all these race conditions disappear. The system becomes simpler and application level code doesn't see all these edge cases and it simplifies the programming model.
> 
> This doesn't just apply to the workflow engine implementation. Most engineers don't use workflow-like orchestrators or workflow-engines to write their services. They use queues, databases and other data sources to create hodgepodge architectures with no transactions across them:
> 
> ![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 017](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113587101-e8b2f080-9660-11eb-9841-8f0141844945.png)
> 
> Our point about lack of transactions leading to race conditions applies to the majority of ad hoc systems built by developers. 
> 
> This is very important to understand: **If you are building a system from these components you're guaranteed to have edge cases in race conditions**. So that's why having a robust engine with something like Temporal's underlying architecture will simplify your life tremendously. If you want to remember one slide for this presentation, remember this one.

Author: ```suggestion
**If you only remember one slide from this presentation, remember this one.**

If you run atop a workflow engine that doesn't have transactions across all these components, you will run into all sorts of race conditions:

- if you update state, and put tasks in task queue, and the state update goes through, but the task queue update fails, your system ends up in a state where it thinks there is a task outstanding but the task is not.
- if you put tasks in a task queue first and then update state, then If your update is slow, the task can be delivered and processed by the time that goes through so it will be inconsistent and need to deal with edge cases

If all these updates are transactional, then all these race conditions disappear. The system becomes simpler and application level code doesn't see all these edge cases and it simplifies the programming model.

This doesn't just apply to the workflow engine implementation. Most engineers don't use workflow-like orchestrators or workflow-engines to write their services. They use queues, databases and other data sources to create hodgepodge architectures with no transactions across them:

![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 017](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113587101-e8b2f080-9660-11eb-9841-8f0141844945.png)

Our point about lack of transactions leading to race conditions applies to the majority of ad hoc systems built by developers. 

This is very important to understand: **If you are building a system from these components you're guaranteed to have edge cases in race conditions**. So that's why having a robust engine with something like Temporal's underlying architecture will simplify your life tremendously.
```

- Samar and Maxim both joined Uber, and built two open source projects: [Cherami](https://eng.uber.com/cherami-message-queue-system/) (a messaging system) and, later, [Cadence](https://github.com/uber/cadence) (an open source implementation of SWF ideas using a completely different software stack).
- When Cadence became very popular, not only inside of Uber where >100 usecases were running on it within 3 years, as well as outside, they quit Uber and started Temporal. Temporal is a fork of Cadence as a separate open source project.
- Temporal has gained some great early adopters, and we count [Hashicorp](https://twitter.com/mitchellh/status/1316510643030114304?s=20), [Box, Checkr](https://docs.temporal.io/blog/tags/case-study), [Datadog](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eWFpl-nzGsY&feature=youtu.be), and [Doordash](https://doordash.engineering/2020/08/14/workflows-cadence-event-driven-processing/) just among those that have been public about their usage.

## The Four Properties of a Workflow (2:52)

What is a workflow?

> Our definition is that a workflow is a:
> 
> - Resilient Program, that
> - Executes Tasks, and
> - Reacts to External Events, including
> - Timers and timeouts
> **Resilient** means that the program will continue execution despite failures (like infrastructure outages and availability zones going down). 
> 
> Usually this program is organized as a **sequence of tasks** and it also has to **react to external events** and **deal with time**. Timers and timeouts are an important component of every business level process.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Our definition is that a workflow is a:

- Resilient Program, that
- Executes Tasks, and
- Reacts to External Events, including
- Timers and timeouts

**Resilient** means that the program will continue execution despite failures (like infrastructure outages and availability zones going down). 

Usually this program is organized as a **sequence of tasks** and it also has to **react to external events** and **deal with time**. Timers and timeouts are an important component of every business level process.

```

The way we solved it in Temporal is using Transfer Queues.

The idea is that every shard which stores workflow state also stores a queue. 10,000 shards, 10,000 queues. Every time we make an update to a shard we can also make an update to the queue because it lives in the same partition.

![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 033](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113587393-4e9f7800-9661-11eb-961b-119524b420c6.png)

So if we need to start a workflow, we:

- create a state for that workflow
- create workflow tasks for the worker to pick up
- add the task to the local queue of that shard
- This will be committed to the database atomically
- a thread pulls from that queue and transfers that message to the queuing subsystem.

![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 035](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113587447-5e1ec100-9661-11eb-8c7a-19064279d07e.png)

This way we have transactional commits with a later transfer to the queueing subsystem. (This transfer could fail and retry so duplicates can occur, but we have a separate part of the system which will do the deduping)

> So this is a very simple mechanism that allows transactionality, but doesn't rely on complex two-phase commit protocols.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
So this is a very simple mechanism that allows transactionality, but doesn't rely on complex two-phase commit protocols.

> Note: This is also known as [the transactional "Outbox" pattern](https://microservices.io/patterns/data/transactional-outbox.html).

```

- Samar also worked on SWF, but later joined Microsoft and became tech lead for [Azure Service Bus](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/service-bus-messaging/service-bus-messaging-overview). As a side project, he wanted to bring to the people the same ideas of SWF, so he developed the [Durable Task Framework](https://github.com/Azure/durabletask), which became so popular that it was adopted by the Azure Functions team. You can now use it as [Azure Durable Functions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/durable/durable-functions-overview?tabs=csharp).
- Samar and Maxim both joined Uber, and built two open source projects: [Cherami](https://eng.uber.com/cherami-message-queue-system/) (a messaging system) and, later, [Cadence](https://github.com/uber/cadence) (an open source implementation of SWF ideas using a completely different software stack).
- When Cadence became very popular, not only inside of Uber where >100 usecases were running on it within 3 years, as well as outside, they quit Uber and started Temporal. Temporal is a fork of Cadence as a separate open source project.

> - Temporal has gained some great early adopters, and we count [Hashicorp](https://twitter.com/mitchellh/status/1316510643030114304?s=20), [Box](https://docs.temporal.io/blog/temporal-a-central-brain-for-box/), [Checkr](https://docs.temporal.io/blog/how-temporal-simplified-checkr-workflows), [Datadog](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eWFpl-nzGsY&feature=youtu.be), and [Doordash](https://doordash.engineering/2020/08/14/workflows-cadence-event-driven-processing/) just among those that have been public about their usage.

Author: The checklinks plugin fails if I don't do this

```suggestion
- Temporal has gained some great early adopters, and we count [Hashicorp](https://twitter.com/mitchellh/status/1316510643030114304?s=20), [Box, Checkr](https://docs.temporal.io/blog/tags/case-study), [Datadog](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eWFpl-nzGsY&feature=youtu.be), and [Doordash](https://doordash.engineering/2020/08/14/workflows-cadence-event-driven-processing/) just among those that have been public about their usage.
```

## The Four Properties of a Workflow (2:52)

What is a workflow?

Our definition is that a workflow is a:

- Resilient Program, that
- Executes Tasks, and
- Reacts to External Events, including
- Timers and timeouts

> 
> ![Designing Workflow Engine-v7-images 007](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6764957/113586735-6f1b0280-9660-11eb-9ed7-edbe4ba4062b.png)
> 

Author: remove

```suggestion

```

We have:

- the **History** component is responsible for state transitions of individual workflows
- we have **Transfer Queues** to be able to transactionally create tasks
- a **Matching** component responsible for delivering tasks for queuing and matching poll for requests coming from external workers
- a **Front-end** component because we need routing
- an **Elastic** component for indexing
- a **Worker** component for background jobs.

This leaves **Workflows** and **Activities** implemented by application developers using Temporal SDKs.

## Bonus: Multi-cluster Deployment (21:00)

This architecture is pretty scalable and reliable because every host can fail and it will still continue functioning: 

- Shards, history, and matching will be redistributed automatically.
- Clustered databases like Cassandra can sustain node failures.
- Elasticsearch is fault tolerant.
- Frontends are stateless so you can add and remove them anytime

But the system still has a single point of failure in terms of blast radius, because a single bad schema deployment to the database can bring it down.

> If you want to provide very high availability, we have **multi-cluster deployment** with synchronous replication. 

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to provide very high availability, we have **multi-cluster deployment** with asynchronous replication. 
```
